\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c $Id: tabfmt.texi,v 1.1.1.1 2009/07/16 02:17:25 reynolds Exp $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename tabfmt.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Tabfmt @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for Tabfmt (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}), 
a software tool for formatting tabular data.

Copyright @copyright{} 2005, 2006 Claudio Jolowicz

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Format tabular data
@direntry
* tabfmt: (tabfmt).	Format tabular data.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Tabfmt
@subtitle Formatting tabular data
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for Tabfmt Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author Claudio Jolowicz (@email{claudio@@jolowicz.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Overview, (dir), (dir)
@top Tabfmt

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::                    
* Invoking tabfmt::             
* Examples::                    
* Reporting Bugs::              
* Copying This Manual::         
* Index::                       
@end menu

@node Overview, Invoking tabfmt, Top, Top
@chapter Overview

@cindex overview
@cindex introduction

Tabfmt is a command line utility to format tabular data. The program
reads lines from one or more files or from standard input, breaks the
lines into fields given a set of input field delimiters, and prints a
table with constant-width columns to standard output or a specified
file. Minimum and maximum field widths, left and right padding, as well
as the characters used for filling, padding and delimiting the fields
can be specified.

This program is meant to integrate well with the standard UNIX utilities
for text manipulation. It is specialised in a simple, everyday task
which is usually too bothersome to implement in shell scripting. While
tabfmt currently formats the table using plain text, extensions may
include output in other formats such as HTML, LaTeX, Texinfo, or XML
languages.

The program was originally written for a GNU environment, but should
build and run on a wide variety of platforms thanks to the GNU autotools
and a portability library which is compiled and linked as needed
(gnulib). It has been successfully built on GNU/Linux, FreeBSD and
NetBSD. The program provides support for localisation using the GNU
gettext package; a German language translation has been provided by the
author. The package contains a preliminary test suite.

@node Invoking tabfmt, Examples, Overview, Top
@chapter Invoking tabfmt

@pindex tabfmt
@cindex invoking @command{tabfmt}

The format for running the @code{tabfmt} program is:

@example
tabfmt @var{option}@dots{} @var{file}@dots{} 
@end example

@code{tabfmt} supports the following options:

@table @samp
@item -w WLIST
@itemx --widths=WLIST
Use WLIST as field widths.

@item -e
@itemx --equal-width
Use equal width for all fields.

@item -f CHAR
@itemx --filler=CHAR
Use CHAR to fill fields [SPC].

@item -a ALIST
@itemx --align=ALIST
Align fields according to LIST.

@item -p LIST
@itemx --padding=LIST
Use LIST as padding [none].

@item -l PLIST
@itemx --left-padding=PLIST
Use PLIST as left padding.

@item -r PLIST
@itemx --right-padding=PLIST
Use PLIST as right padding.

@item -P
@itemx --padder=CHAR
Use CHAR as padding character [SPC].

@item -d
@itemx --delimiter=DELIM
Set of field delimiters [TAB,SPC].

@item -D DELIM
@itemx --output-delimiter=DELIM
Output field delimiter [TAB].

@item -o FILE
@itemx --output=FILE
Write output to FILE [stdout].

@item --debug
Print debugging information.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Print an informative help message describing the options and then exit.

@item -V
@itemx --version
Print the version number of @code{tabfmt} and then exit.
@end table

@node Examples, Reporting Bugs, Invoking tabfmt, Top
@chapter Examples

@cindex sample
@cindex example

Here is an example of running @code{tabfmt}.

Below is the output of the command @samp{tabfmt -d: /etc/passwd}:

@example
root       	x	0    	0    	root                 /root              	/bin/bash 
daemon     	x	1    	1    	daemon               /usr/sbin          	/bin/sh   
bin        	x	2    	2    	bin                  /bin               	/bin/sh   
sys        	x	3    	3    	sys                  /dev               	/bin/sh   
sync       	x	4    	65534	sync                 /bin               	/bin/sync 
games      	x	5    	60   	games                /usr/games         	/bin/sh   
man        	x	6    	12   	man                  /var/cache/man     	/bin/sh   
lp         	x	7    	7    	lp                   /var/spool/lpd     	/bin/sh   
mail       	x	8    	8    	mail                 /var/mail          	/bin/sh   
news       	x	9    	9    	news                 /var/spool/news    	/bin/sh   
uucp       	x	10   	10   	uucp                 /var/spool/uucp    	/bin/sh   
proxy      	x	13   	13   	proxy                /bin               	/bin/sh   
www-data   	x	33   	33   	www-data             /var/www           	/bin/sh   
backup     	x	34   	34   	backup               /var/backups       	/bin/sh   
list       	x	38   	38   	Mailing List Manager /var/list          	/bin/sh   
irc        	x	39   	39   	ircd                 /var/run/ircd      	/bin/sh   
nobody     	x	65534	65534	nobody               /nonexistent       	/bin/sh   
Debian-exim	x	102  	102  	                     /var/spool/exim4   	/bin/false
sshd       	x	100  	65534	                     /var/run/sshd      	/bin/false
admin      	x	1000 	1000 	Administrator,,,     /home/admin        	/bin/bash 
cj         	x	1001 	1001 	Claudio Jolowicz,,,  /home/cj           	/bin/bash 
@end example

@node Reporting Bugs, Copying This Manual, Examples, Top
@chapter Reporting Bugs

@cindex Bugs, reporting
@cindex Suggestions for Tabfmt, making
@cindex Reporting bugs
I welcome bug reports and suggestions for Tabfmt.  Please email them to
@email{claudio@@jolowicz.com}.  You can get the latest version of Tabfmt
from @uref{http://www.jolowicz.com}.

@cindex Checklist for bug reports
For bug reports, please include enough information for the maintainers
to reproduce the problem.  Generally speaking, that means:

@itemize @bullet
@item the version number of Tabfmt.
@item hardware and operating system names and versions.
@item the contents of any input files necessary to reproduce the bug.
@item a description of the problem and samples of any erroneous output.
@item any unusual options you gave to @command{configure}.
@item anything else that you think would be helpful.
@end itemize

When in doubt whether something is needed or not, include it.  It's
better to include too much than to leave out something important.

@cindex Patches, contributing
Patches are most welcome; if possible, please make them with
@samp{@w{diff -c}} (@pxref{Top,, Overview, diff, Comparing and Merging
Files}) and include @file{ChangeLog} entries (@pxref{Change Log,,,
emacs, The GNU Emacs Manual}).

When sending patches, if possible please do not encode or split them in
any way; it's much easier to deal with one plain text message, however
large, than many small ones.  @uref{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/sharutils/,
GNU shar} is a convenient way of packaging multiple and/or binary files
for email.

@node Copying This Manual, Index, Reporting Bugs, Top
@appendix Copying This Manual

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@include fdl.texi

@node Index,  , Copying This Manual, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c tabfmt.texi ends here
